How I Built My First 'Agentic AI' (and Finally Understood What It Means)
By Abhishek Jain
Published on Medium — July 9, 2025

The term “Agentic AI” is everywhere, but what is it really? I built a simple Python assistant with Google Gemini to find out. If you're curious, this is the simple, non-technical explanation you've been looking for.

You've probably seen the term “Agentic AI” popping up everywhere. I certainly did. For a while, it felt like another piece of complex jargon in the fast-moving world of artificial intelligence. I understood chatbots, but how was an “agent” different?

I realized the best way to understand a concept is to build it.

So, I set out on a personal project with a simple goal: build the most basic version of an “AI Agent” possible to truly grasp the philosophy behind it. I wanted to see it think and act, not just answer questions.

This article is the story of that project. It's the “aha!” moment I had, broken down into simple steps. And the best part? It's all done with straightforward Python and Google's Gemini Pro model.

You can find the complete, ready-to-run code on my GitHub.

So, What is an Agentic AI, in Plain English?

Imagine you hire a personal assistant. You don't just ask them for facts; you give them tasks.

A chatbot is like asking your assistant, “What is the capital of Spain?” They answer “Madrid” and their job is done. An AI agent is like telling your assistant, “Figure out how much it would cost for a team of 4 to fly to Madrid next month.”

The assistant now has a multi-step task. They can't just answer from memory. They need to:
1. Reason: “Okay, I need to check flight prices.”
2. Use a Tool: Open a web browser to a flight website.
3. Use another Tool: Use a calculator to multiply the price by four.
4. Synthesize: Combine the information to give you a final answer.

That's the core philosophy of Agentic AI. It's an AI that doesn't just know, it does. It has a goal, a reasoning brain, and a toolbox.

My First Step: Building the Brain and the Toolbox

My simple agent needed two things: a brain and some tools.

1. The Brain (The LLM): This is the reasoning engine. I used Google's Gemini Pro model. Its job isn't to do the work, but to decide what work needs to be done.

2. The Toolbox (Python Functions): These are the simple, real-world actions the agent can take. I started with the basics:
- calculate(expression): A safe calculator.
- get_time(): A watch to check the current time.
- remember(info) & recall(): A simple notepad for memory.

In my simpleagent.py file, setting this up looked like this:

# The agent's "desk" is set up when it's hired
class SimpleAgent:
    def __init__(self, model_name, api_key, ...):
        # The connection to the "brain"
        self.model = genai.GenerativeModel(model_name)
        # An empty notepad
        self.memory = []
        # The toolbox, ready to be used
        self.tools = {
            'calculate': self.calculate,
            'get_time': self.get_time,
            'remember': self.remember,
            'recall': self.recall
        }

The “Aha!” Moment: The Think-Act Loop

This was the part that made it all click. An agent works in a loop, just like a person.

Think -> Act -> Observe -> Repeat

When I give my agent a task like “What is (1024–256) / 4?”, here's what happens under the hood:

1. THINK: The agent sends the task and its history to the Gemini “brain.” It asks, “Based on this task, what should I do next? Should I use a tool, or am I finished?” The brain responds with a structured command, like: { “tool_name”: “calculate”, “args”: { “expression”: “(1024–256) / 4” } }.
2. ACT: My Python code sees this command and executes the calculate tool with the given math expression.
3. OBSERVE: The tool returns a result, for example: “Result: 192”. The agent adds this outcome to its working memory. The task isn't finished yet!
4. REPEAT (THINK AGAIN): Now the agent goes back to the brain. It says, “My initial task was to do some math. I used the calculator and got 'Result: 192'. What's next?” The brain sees that the calculation is done and the result is found. It now decides the task is complete and responds with a final answer: { “answer”: “The result is 192.” }.

This loop is the heart of agentic behavior. It's a continuous cycle of planning and execution.

The Upgrade: Giving My Agent a Connection to the World

My agent was smart, but it was stuck in a box. It couldn't answer, “Who is the current CEO of Microsoft?” To fix this, I gave it a new tool: a connection to the internet via SerpApi.

This was a huge leap. Now, when the agent's brain realizes it needs information it doesn't have, it can choose the web_search tool.

I also built a simple web interface with Gradio (app.py) so anyone could interact with it. To make sure the app didn't freeze during a web search, I learned a bit about Python's async/await. Think of it like a chef who can put a cake in the oven (the slow web search) and then chop vegetables (keep the UI responsive) while they wait, instead of just staring at the oven door.

Why This Matters

Building this simple project taught me that “Agentic AI” isn't about magic. It's an engineering pattern. It's about combining the powerful reasoning of an LLM with the practical, real-world capabilities of simple code.

It's a shift from asking an AI to be a know-it-all encyclopedia to asking it to act like a capable assistant.

If you've been curious about what agents are, I highly encourage you to look at the code. You'll be surprised at how simple the core idea is. My journey from confusion to clarity was driven by just a few lines of Python, and I hope this explanation provides a similar “aha!” moment for you.
